# Partial AI Workflow: Gameboy

This is an interactive experiment that was created using both human and AI efforts EQUALLY.

## 1. Introduction

### 1.1 Both a Wizard and a Tool

AI enables those with no or low prior knowledge or experience to ideate and build items beyond what their current human capabilities allow. However, if a human prompts AI to create, they immediately take the command position while the AI takes the worker position. The human becomes the "non-technical" manager to a technical team (AI). An AI user who has a large knowledge base and expertise would also assume the same command position but as a technical manager to a technical team. Assuming that the learning curve of AI tools is not extreme, it is postulated that the more knowledge or experience that the user has would increase their ability to utilize AI as a tool or partner, and the less knowledge and experience the user has would inversely increase their ability to abuse AI as a "know-it-all" wizard.

This is not to say that users who understand AI as a learning tool can't and do not increase skills and experience during AI usage; AI can foster personal development undoubtly; but humans often use it as a wizard-like generator, an all-knowing god that can make anything for them, skipping from start to finish without ever needing to start themselves. Just ask a question or two. Speedy creation undermines the ability to gain deep understanding, technical know-how, and getting hands dirty. Human cognition shifts from ask>understand>do>understand to asking>understand>asking. If humans disregard the learning through doing, losing out on hands-on learning and creation, would humans assume a life of not *doing* but simply commanding? Generative AI as a creation wizard vs. Generative AI as a tool. A seesaw that humans teeter on.

(By the way, this is written by someone who has no professional background in AI ethics, ML, or Cognitive Science. This is a product designer and artist speaking.)

### 1.2 Creativity

So if an image is tagged with "Generated by AI" the user was using it as a wizard? (Hopefully videos will have those too, else social media will continue to landslide into oblivion) But what about other creative works that are not single-prompt wonders? Are we able to call a project "AI-generated" if a developer asked AI a couple questions, generated bits and pieces of code, debugged manually, and developed some functions themselves? What about a gallery piece that stemmed from an AI-generated prompt, is that AI-generated too?

It is difficult to draw a definitive line for when content is AI-generated and when it is not, and this is a heavy topic in the context of AI ethics, though I believe this topic should be more personal than overarching ethical discussion. Disrupting creative workflows indicates impact on human learning and cognitive patterns. Typically when someone is burdened by a task they do not want to do or can't complete a task due to skill/knowledge/bandwidth gaps, they either give up or continue to push towards their goal through creative approaches. Pushing through with creative approaches vary between individuals, but the common thread is hitting challenges that act as catalysts for growth in different areas. This is creativity; it is in the process after perception: looping ideation and execution. Running to AI as a form of pushing towards success is a valid approach, but "with great power comes great responsibility".

Koivisto and Grassini (2023) found that variation in creativity is higher among human-only output, AI-generated rated higher on average on the creativity scale, and top human performers still outperformed AI on the originality scale. It seems that AI should be used because it is more "creative", but in such studies, creativity is rated based on output entirely, excluding process, which is where most creativity dwells. 

If one uses AI to complete tasks one after the other, complete and heavy reliance on AI, the creativity factor in their approach would weaken. The AI would jump past the hurdles that would otherwise require human creativity to overcome more often than not, so less oppotunities for creative approaches would be presented to the user. Ideation is still present, but perhaps opportunities for it may decrease from 100% to 70%. As for execution, it may as well go all the way down to 1% (clicking "send to chat" over and over again). I have yet to examine and come up with specific workflow examples to illustrate comparisons. The need for human creativity lessens when AI is used for every challenge. As pathways for ideation shift into more metacognition, there is potential for less creative oppotunities and deeper learning. Execution, the other facet of creativity, becomes invisible, despite the innnate hands-on learning nature of humans. Then should users who treat AI like Gandalf take all pride and credit for works? By no means. To do so would be to be a manager who gives poor, ambigious, and ignorant commands to a talented team while taking all the credit for themselves.

## 1.3 Originality

Again, we are comparing the behavioral extremes:

1. User with lower baseline creativity, technical skill, and experience who participates in AI-only generation (as a wizard).
2. User with high baseline creativity, technical skill, and experience who participates in co-creation with AI (as a tool).

Rewarding non-creative approaches that do not ilicit hard work will not produce creative output of increasing quality in the future. It is true that technology has always lowered cognitive load required by humans, but tools in the past were simply tools, never a wizard. If a tool helps users complete one or two tasks more easily, they could spend more time on other challenges and tasks. If a wizard can perform a million tasks for the user, lazy users discover they may be rewarded for low effort. This user type would be encouraged to continue producing AI-generated, highly templated internet garbage. 

Being trained on existing data, there is a limited number of creative approaches that an AI can use to tackle the challenges that users would otherwise be facing on their own. According to Doshi and Hauser (2024), in the context of writing, AI co-creation may increase creativity, especially benefitting users with lower baseline creativity, but at the cost of diversity (collective novelty). But what about non-text based creative outputs? In the context of visual and highly interactive works, I believe human creativity may falter even more so, along with quality of output. AI is known for being "good" at writing tasks because their basis is language, yet when users command wizardry in sectors where the AI is effectively blinder than a bat, creative execution suffers more. Execution is possible, but not creatively so. 

Studies on visual content generation, again, focus on output quality although nuances in creativity and learning is largely in process. Film directors and experienced artists, for example, understand that human narrative demands manual judgement rather than AI's rigidity and "correctness". I believe they typically say this not only to justify and achieve quality output, but because they know deeply that challenges and processes are the breeding grounds for creativity. For newness, beauty, and human emotion. Following their perspectives on a larger scale, will not brands and products succeed if emotional narrative and storytelling it is said to be?

### 1.4 Bottom Line

AI-generation must be used intentionally. Understand when you are using it as a wizard and when you are using it as a tool.

Creativity is fostered in the perpetual loop of ideation and creation; the process behind output; approaches to challenges.

## 2. A Gameboy

### 2.1 3D Decor

As a product designer, I've witnessed repositories of websites that include 3D models as decoration, but as a part-time 3D artist, these websites always fall short of 3D artists who excel in their craft, whether it be games, vfx, or animation. "Obviously, the web can't power complex 3D systems". Maybe that is not the case. Maybe web designers are using 3D simply as decoration and rarely as a narrative component. That may explain the excessive amount of floating, pretty-looking 3D orbs.

I really like the saying that product designer Phillip Lee placed in his portfolio site: "All good things take time". Indeed, I think the 3D design can be pushed further in web applications. Not just as decoration. Where am I going with this? I am not entirely sure.

## 2.2 Intentional AI Co-Creation

To be continued...